Improved developer docs about test data files (#41705)
mantidproject/mantid: dev-docs/source/DataFilesForTesting.rst

a workspace with 10 detectors using ``WorkspaceCreationHelper::create2DWorkspaceWithFullInstrument()``.
In the second test, testComplex, it reads a file ``unit_testing/MAPS_Definition_Reduced.xml``, which contains
the definition of a MAPS instrument with the number of detectors reduced much to ensure it is read
quickly but preserving the other properties of this instrument. However, new tests should avoid even
loading of this nature unless there is a strong justification for doing so.

**Main issues:**

-  Need to store data, mainly for testing, alongside the code
-  Some data needs to be versioned
-  Merging system tests back with main code requires handling large data
   files
-  Git is bad at handling binary files

**Possible solutions:**

-  CMake's `ExternalData <https://www.kitware.com/cmake-externaldata-using-large-files-with-distributed-version-control/>`__
-  Don't have any reference to data in git and force developers to
   manage the data stored on a file server
-  Extensions to git, e.g.
   `git-fat <https://github.com/jedbrown/git-fat>`__,
   `git-annex <https://git-annex.branchable.com/>`__ to deal with large

>    files

Reviewer: To me this still reads like a discussion of options that have not yet been chosen.

I'd suggest change it to something like

```
**Implementation**

To avoid issues with storing large files in Git version control, Mantid uses CMake's `ExternalData <https://www.kitware.com/cmake-externaldata-using-large-files-with-distributed-version-control/>`__

This allows storing the data on a separate server and only keeping a reference to each file in Git. Files are added by developers and can be downloaded by CMake to use with tests.
```

If you want to keep the info about `git-fat` and `git-annex` I'd suggest it goes in an "alternative implementations" section right at the bottom.

- `.../Testing/Data/SystemTest`
- `.../Testing/Data/UnitTest`

However, it is known that some developers like to reuse the same data files for different type of tests,
therefore sometimes the DocTest and SystemTest are using data from UnitTest, which means you should fetch
all testing data before trying to run any test locally. Furthermore, this location is mostly considered as
a centralized location for all testing data. But some groups prefer to treat this location for storing **input**
testing data only, therefore the testing system will look for the reference folder mentioned above if it cannot

> find the reference data here. There are many examples where the same data file having to be duplicated accross multiple locations as required by the tests.

Reviewer: `accross` -> `across`

- `.../Testing/Data/SystemTest`
- `.../Testing/Data/UnitTest`

However, it is known that some developers like to reuse the same data files for different type of tests,
therefore sometime the DocTest and SystemTest is using data from UnitTest, which means you should fetch
all testing data before trying to run any test locally. Furthermore, this location is mostly considered as
a centralized location for all testing data. But some groups prefer to treat this location for storing **input**
testing data only, therefore the testing system will look for the reference folder mentioned above if it cannot
find the reference data here. Overall, it is important to talk to the senior developers in your team to learn the

> preferred location for storing testing data.

Reviewer: There also seem plenty of cases where files are duplicated between those directories, so I think that should be noted too.

It might be worth asking the rest of the team what approach is best:

- Clean separation of test files into the separate dirs, so that uses can download just the ones they need. So if a file is used in both doc and system test, it will be in both directories. Treat missing cases as bugs (e.g. #41658)
- Move all the test files to a single directory, merge the CMake rules into a single TestData. Less duplication on disk, but more unnecessary downloads.

> .. _DataFilesForTesting_AddingANewFile:

Reviewer 2: I'd also link this section in:

https://github.com/mantidproject/mantid/blob/8b0dffcb7ac7c3b43f3815c60eb9049a72246b74/dev-docs/source/UnitTestGoodPractice.rst?plain=1#L164-L174

P.S. The scoped file link in this section is broken

On Linux/Mac you will need to set the variable in the shell profile or
on Linux you can set it system wide in ``/etc/environment``.

> CMake targets downloading test data

Reviewer 2: It might be worth linking to this section in:

https://github.com/mantidproject/mantid/blob/8b0dffcb7ac7c3b43f3815c60eb9049a72246b74/dev-docs/source/RunningTheUnitTests.rst?plain=1#L3-L13

And just saying something along the lines of:

```
Overview
########

We use `CTest <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html>`__
for building and running our unit tests. This wraps the underlying
`cxxtest <cxxtest>`__ or other (e.g. pyunit) test code.

This guide assumes all test data has already been retrieved from the remote store, 
for instructions on how to do this, refer to :ref:`make-a-link-to-this-section`
```

Reviewer 2: Likewise https://github.com/mantidproject/mantid/blob/8b0dffcb7ac7c3b43f3815c60eb9049a72246b74/dev-docs/source/SystemTests.rst?plain=1#L181-L187

-----------------------------------

> Currently there are four CMake targets defined at `SetupDataTargets.cmake <https://github.com/mantidproject/mantid/blob/main/buildconfig/CMake/SetupDataTargets.cmake>`__ as shown below that download the test data when built. The corrsponding data will appear in the path defined by ``ExternalData_BINARY_ROOT`` CMake variable, which defaults to ``build/ExternalData``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently there are four CMake targets defined at `SetupDataTargets.cmake <https://github.com/mantidproject/mantid/blob/main/buildconfig/CMake/SetupDataTargets.cmake>`__ (shown below) that download the test data when built. The corresponding data will appear in the path defined by the ``ExternalData_BINARY_ROOT`` CMake variable, which defaults to ``build/ExternalData``.
```
